---
author: Gwen Zervos
time: 6 min read
date: 2022
---

# Deus Ex Machinaa
The Deus Ex Machina of the Present

## Saved at last
You’re running through the rain. There’s a crowd with torches and pitchforks chasing you, it’s at least seventy angry people. The people chasing you are furious because they are convinced you committed a crime; however, you are innocent. <!--more--> The crowd is getting closer, and you’re running out energy. Just when you think there’s no hope left, you hear the sound of a car racing toward you. It’s your best friend, and he knows you’re innocent. Your Deus Ex Machina. He opens the door, and you get in quickly, as your friend is ready to drive away as fast as he can. Oh yeah, and he also has superpowers, by the way.

## God from the Machine
When you read or see stories with an intervention like this, the concept ‘Deus Ex Machina’ might come to mind. [Deus Ex Machina](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/deus%20ex%20machina), Latin for God from the machine, is a person or thing (as in fiction or drama) that appears or is introduced suddenly and unexpectedly and provides a contrived solution to an apparently insoluble difficulty.

In the ancient times, this person or thing that intervenes would often, though not always, be a literal God, for this God would be able to intervene and save the characters from a terribly difficult situation. Some examples of this are the stories of [Medea](https://www.alleytheatre.org/stage-notes/the-medea-myth) and [Alcestis](https://www.britannica.com/topic/Alcestis-Greek-mythology). However, a Deus can be anything or anyone that unexpectedly intervenes with, and ‘saves’, the plot.

When the term Deus Ex Machina was invented a long, long time ago, ‘Machina’ refers to the [cranes](https://www.merriam-webster.com/dictionary/deus%20ex%20machina) that would hold up the ‘God’, often striking down on the stage from the ceiling or ‘sky’ in plays. However, the context of the word machine back then was entirely different from the context now.  

We don’t live in a time where we think of cranes when we hear the word machine anymore. We live in a time of smart technology. So smart, even, that with this technology, humans have created something called artificial intelligence.

## Artificial Intelligence

You have probably heard about Artificial Intelligence, whether it was in a movie, the news, a book, or social media. AI is an exciting subject for many people. However, there are a lot of misconceptions about AI. It is a relatively [feared](https://www.technologyreview.com/2015/02/11/169210/our-fear-of-artificial-intelligence/) concept even.

For example, some people believe that one day, AI might become smarter than us, and therefore we will start to rely on it. This is not confirmed and often not believed to even happen in our lifetimes, however, AI is mysterious to a lot of people, like a Deus. This mystery, and the constant unexpected and quick developments surrounding AI leaves room for thoughts like these.  

The mystery surrounding AI sometimes comes from lack of - or wrong - information. Therefore, it’s important to note how AI actually works.

Simply put, [AI can do things that would otherwise require human intelligence.](https://medium.com/mytake/artificial-intelligence-explained-in-simple-english-part-1-2-1b28c1f762cf) By collecting all sorts of data, it ‘learns’ like humans learn from experience, books, or conversation. Because AI learns from this data, it becomes smarter and is now able to do things humans have been doing for ages, such as classify, analyse, and predict.

Now this may still sound pretty basic, but an AI can get really smart these days, to the point where it can be used to make self-driving cars5, write nearly perfect essays, or create fullblown [pieces of art](https://openai.com/). These developments are quite recent and they happened quickly.

## Intervention
We will certainly notice these changes in our daily lives. Think of shifts in the structure of the job market, but also new inventions we can use, creating easier, sometimes even safer ways to do our tasks. While there is some fear surrounding AI, it might just have a lot in store for us as well.  

In any case, Artificial Intelligence is intervening in the way we live, and it’s happening fast, like a divine intervention in an ancient play.  

## AI as Deus Ex Machina
The comparison between AI and Deus Ex Machina is a very interesting subject. Not only does the translation ‘God from the Machine’ very much resemble the mystery behind AI in our modern context, AI also creates quick shifts in the course of our civilization, just as a Deus Ex Machina would shift the course of a plot in theatres.

So, this begs the question; is AI the Deus Ex Machina of our generation? It very well could be, but I leave that up to you to think about.