---
title: Writer’s blocks, sleeping bags and AI
subtitle: How to overcome an empty piece of paper.
author: Gwen Zervos
time: 4 min read
date: 2022

---

#### Empty papers
Every writer has probably experienced a writers’ block somewhere in their lifetime. The pressure of deadlines, creativity issues or just wanting to write a good story to be proud of can be overwhelming. This can cause us to feel stuck, and suddenly, of all the words that exist, none seem to be fit.

Writers’ blocks can be a downward spiral. The block itself can frustrate a writer even more, causing even more trouble to get something on paper. First things first, it’s important to remember that you are not alone. Famous writers like Maya Angelou and Roald Dahl have had to overcome writers’ blocks too. The strategies they used to overcome them are no secret, luckily for us!

#### Famous flows
In the biography ‘Roald Dahl’ by Chris Powling, [Dahl is described to have a pretty technical and specific way of getting himself in his writing flow](https://books.google.nl/books/about/Roald_Dahl.html?id=5DM4mzntfgIC&redir_esc=y):

> “He steps into a sleeping bag, pulls it up to his waist and settles himself in a faded wing-backed armchair. His feet he rests on a battered travelling case full of logs. This is roped to the legs of the armchair so it’s always at a perfect distance.”

[Maya Angelou has a less physical and a more cognitive way of getting out of her writing block.](https://www.michaeldpollock.com/maya-angelou-on-writing/) She takes writing whatever comes to mind quite literally, and she sometimes does it for, well, weeks.

> “What I try to do is write. I may write for two weeks ‘the cat sat on the mat, that is that, not a rat.’ And it might be just the most boring and awful stuff. But I try. When I’m writing, I write. And then it’s as if the muse is convinced that I’m serious and says, ‘Okay. Okay. I’ll come.'”

#### A new resort
It could be that investigating these strategies give you a new, fresh look on your problem. There’s all kinds of tips and tricks on how to overcome this block. However, it could also be that you have heard them all, and you’re still trying to find a way that works for you.

Well, we can call ourselves lucky that we are struggling with this issue in the 21st century, because this is where Artificial Intelligence comes in. Today, there are many smart AI databases that can generate images, art, music, or text. Because AI doesn’t experience the pressure of time, money, or self-esteem, it won’t get stuck like us humans can get stuck. An AI, with all the knowledge and inspiration from databases all around the world, will keep thinking out of the box. And this is exactly what we humans sometimes need.

There are already some apps that use AI specifically to help you get to write again, a great example is mini.ai. This app allows you to generate text based on what you have already written. Don’t know how to start? That’s no problem at all. The app also allows you to give the AI commands right from the start. For example, you could tell the AI to write a story about the colour of frogs, and it will do so.

#### The tool of the future
AI is a wonderful tool for a great number of purposes. It can help you make sense out of ideas, regain your inspiration, and help you finish your tasks. We are very curious to see how AI will be used in the arts in the coming years.

So, the next time you are feeling stuck, why not give AI a chance? After all, it never hurts to try!